The Project Gutenberg EBook of How to Do Chemical Tricks, by A. Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: How to Do Chemical Tricks
       Containing Over One Hundred Highly Amusing and Instructive
       Tricks With Chemicals

Author: A. Anderson

Release Date: September 30, 2015 [EBook #50100]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO DO CHEMICAL TRICKS ***




Produced by Craig Kirkwood, Demian Katz and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (Images
courtesy of the Digital Library@Villanova University
(http://digital.library.villanova.edu/).)






Transcriber’s Notes:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_), and text
enclosed by equal signs is in bold (=bold=).

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end, including some
corrections to the text.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HOW TO DO CHEMICAL TRICKS]




HOW TO DO CHEMICAL TRICKS.


  Containing Over One Hundred Highly
  Amusing and Instructive Tricks
  With Chemicals.

  By A. ANDERSON.

  HANDSOMELY ILLUSTRATED.

  NEW YORK:
  FRANK TOUSEY, Publisher,
  24 UNION SQUARE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1898, by

FRANK TOUSEY,

in the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington, D.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOW TO DO CHEMICAL TRICKS.

From the remotest ages chemistry has exercised the strongest
fascination on the minds of the curious, nor is it a matter of surprise
that boys should feel themselves drawn strongly by its mystery and
seeming magic. This attraction is undoubtedly caused by what the
ancients called the elements, earth, air, fire and water. There is
something so weird about the manifestation of air and fire, that it
is not difficult to understand how the alchemists believed them to be
forces able to be used at the bidding of spirits, who might be conjured
up by incantations and spells.

Now it is known that these uncanny beings existed only in the
imagination of the forerunners of modern chemists. Yet what boy can
look on the brilliantly colored fires of a Fourth of July display, or
the burnished gold of the setting sun, or the fantastic pictures in the
glowing coals in a grate, and not feel that there is still something
of magic and mystery in fire still? What the boy feels, the scientist
cannot explain. Nobody knows actually what fire is. All that can be
said is that fire is produced by certain substances, such as coals,
wood, or paper, that give out heat, while passing from one state to
another.

Now the word “element” was and is used to mean that simplest form of
matter, which, with other simplest forms goes to make up the whole
world of everything in it. The earth, animals, plants, the sea, the
atmosphere, are all made up of one or more of some seventy substances
called elements. Hence it is clear that the earth, air and water are
not, as the ancients thought, elements at all. As will be seen in this
little book, both air and water consist of mixtures of elements. In
chemistry such mixtures are called compounds. This word occurs again
and again, so its explanation should be remembered.

One great fact must be remembered, which is at the very root of
chemistry. Nothing is really lost, however much its form may be
changed, or however many changes it may pass through. For instance, it
may seem that when a block of wood be burned that a very large amount
of it is lost. If, however, the ashes, the smoke, and the carbon that
is burned by the air be all weighed, the result would be exactly the
same as the weight of the original block of wood.

Again take an instance of a different nature. A lump of sugar is placed
in a small glass of water. Gradually the solid is dissolved, and in
time disappears. It is not lost, however. By boiling the mixture until
all the water has evaporated the sugar will be found adhering as
crystals on the sides of the glass. If these be carefully collected,
they will be found to weigh precisely as much as the original lump of
sugar.

Once more, take a block of ice weighing an ounce. Having removed
it into a room, the solid will in an hour or two have disappeared
entirely, but the water that has replaced the block of ice will weigh
neither more nor less than an ounce. If again heat be applied to the
water it will all disappear, but if weighed in a jam jar, the steam,
although invisible to the eye, will still weigh one ounce exactly.

From the above-given experiments it may be seen that, however matter
may change its form it cannot really be destroyed. This truth will
appear in every experiment that can be performed, whether those given
in this little book or in the most learned treatise on chemistry.




Chemical Affinity.


This high-sounding term means that substances have a power of uniting
together that can be better explained by an experiment. Allow a few
drops of water to fall on a perfectly clean piece of iron. In a short
time a reddish-brown substance will appear on the iron that in ordinary
language is called rust. What does this mean? Water is a compound
substance composed of oxygen and hydrogen, but when brought into
contact with iron the oxygen prefers to unite with the iron and sets
the hydrogen free. Hence, would the chemist say, oxygen has a “stronger
affinity” for iron than for hydrogen. In this case the rust is composed
of rust, a combination of iron and oxygen called oxide of iron. What
has taken place may be shown by the following, which will be easily
understood:

  Oxygen   } Water + Iron = Oxide
  Hydrogen } of Iron + Hydrogen.

So all that the chemical combination in the above means is that the
iron has taken the place of the hydrogen in the water used for the
experiment. If weighed it would be found as always, that the water
and the iron weighed precisely the same as the oxide of iron and the
hydrogen.

It is to this same principle of chemical affinity that the curious
experiments of magic writing with sympathetic inks are possible.




Sympathetic Inks.


By means of these may be carried on a correspondence which is beyond
the discovery of all not in the secret. With one class of these inks
the writing becomes visible only when moistened with a particular
solution. Thus, if we write to you with a solution of sulphate of iron
the letters are invisible. On the receipt of our letter, you rub over
the sheet a feather or sponge, wet with a solution of nut-galls, and
the letters burst forth into sensible being at once, and are permanent.

2. If we write with a solution of sugar of lead and you moisten with
a sponge or pencil dipped in water impregnated with sulphuretted
hydrogen, the letters will appear with metallic brilliancy.

3. If we write with a weak solution of sulphate of copper, and you
apply ammonia, the letters assume a beautiful blue. When the ammonia
evaporates as it does on exposure to the sun or fire, the writing
disappears, but may be revived again as before.

4. If you write with oil of vitriol very much diluted, so as to prevent
its destroying the paper, the manuscript will be invisible except when
held to the fire, when the letters will appear black.

5. Write with cobalt dissolved in diluted muriatic acid; the letters
will be invisible when cold, but when warmed they will appear a bluish
green.

Secrets thus written will not be brought to the knowledge of a
stranger, because he does not know the solution which was used in
writing, and therefore knows not what to apply to bring out the letters.

Other forms of elective affinity produce equally novel results. Thus,
two invisible gases, when combined, form sometimes a _visible solid_.
Muriatic acid and ammonia are examples, also ammonia and carbonic acid.

On the other hand, if a solution of sulphate of soda be mixed with a
solution of muriate of lime the whole becomes solid.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some gases when united form liquids, as oxygen and hydrogen, which
unite and form water. Some solids when combined form liquids.

Chemical affinity is sometimes called _elective_, or the effect of
_choice_, as if one substance exerted a kind of _preference_ for
another, and chose to be united to it rather than to that with which
it was previously combined; thus, if you pour some vinegar, which is
a weak acetic acid, upon some pearlash (a combination of potash and
carbonic acid), or some carbonate of soda (a combination of the same
acid with soda), a violent effervescence will take place, occasioned by
the escape of the carbonic acid, displaced in consequence of the potash
or soda preferring the acetic acid, and forming a compound called an
acetate.

Then, if some sulphuric acid be poured on this new compound, the acetic
acid will, in its turn, be displaced by the greater attachment of
either of the bases, as they are termed, for the sulphuric acid. Again,
if into a solution of blue vitriol (a combination of sulphuric acid
with copper), the bright blade of a knife be introduced, the knife will
speedily be covered with a coat of copper, deposited in consequence of
the acid _preferring_ the iron of which the knife is made, a quantity
of it being dissolved in exact proportion to the quantity of copper
deposited.

It is on the same principle that a very beautiful preparation called a
silver-tree, or a lead-tree, may be formed, thus: Fill a wide bottle,
capable of holding from half a pint to a pint, with a tolerably strong
solution of nitrate of silver (lunar caustic), or acetate of lead, in
pure distilled water. Then attach a small piece of zinc by a string
to the cork or stopper of the bottle, so that the zinc shall hang
about the middle of the bottle, and set it by where it may be quite
undisturbed. In a short time brilliant plates of silver or lead, as the
case may be, will be seen to collect around the piece of zinc, assuming
more or less of the crystalline form. This is a case of elective
affinity; the acid with which the silver or lead was united _prefers_
the zinc to either of those metals, and in consequence discards them
in order to attach the zinc to itself; and this process will continue
until the whole of the zinc is taken up, or the whole of the silver or
lead deposited.




Alum Baskets.


Form a small basket about the size of the hand, of iron wire or split
willow; then take some cotton, such as ladies use for running into
flounces; untwist it and wind it round every limb of the basket. Boil
eighteen ounces of alum in a quart of water, or quantities in that
proportion; stir the mixture while boiling until the alum is completely
dissolved. Pour the solution into a deep pan, or other convenient
vessel, and suspend the basket in the liquor, so that no part of the
basket shall touch the vessel, or be exposed to the air. Let the whole
remain perfectly at rest for twenty-four hours. When you then remove
the basket the alum will be found very prettily crystallized over all
the limbs of the cottoned frame.




Easy Crystallizations.


Saturate water _kept boiling_ with alum; then set the solution in a
cool place, suspending in it, by a hair, or fine silk thread, a cinder,
a sprig of a plant, or any other trifle. As the solution cools, a
beautiful crystallization of the salt takes place upon the cinders,
etc., which are made to resemble specimens of mineralogical spars.




To Make a Piece of Charcoal Appear as Though it were Coated with Gold.


Dilute a saturated solution of chloride of gold with five times its
bulk of water; place a thin strip of fresh burned charcoal into it, and
apply heat, gradually increasing it until the solution gently boils.
The heat will make the charcoal precipitate the metal on the charcoal,
in the form of brilliant spangles.




To Give a Piece of Charcoal a Rich Coat of Silver.


Lay a crystal of nitrate of silver upon a piece of burning charcoal;
the metallic salt will catch fire, and throw out the most beautiful
scintillations that can be imagined. The silver is reduced, and, in the
end, produces upon the charcoal a very brilliant appearance.

Many animal and vegetable substances, consist, for the most part, of
carbon, or charcoal, united with oxygen and hydrogen, which remember,
together combined, form water. Now oil of vitriol or strong sulphuric
acid, has so powerful an affinity or so great a thirst for water, that
it will abstract it from almost any body in which it exists. If you
pour some of this acid on a lump of sugar, or place a chip of wood in a
small quantity of it, the sugar or wood will become speedily blackened,
that is charred, in consequence of the oxygen and hydrogen being
removed by the sulphuric acid, and only the carbon or charcoal left.

When Cleopatra dissolved pearls of wondrous value in vinegar, she was
unwittingly giving an example of chemical affinity. The pearl is simply
carbonate of lime stored up by the oyster in layers. Consequently the
precious jewels were decomposed by the greater affinity or fondness
of lime for the acetic acid in the vinegar, than for the carbonic
acid with which it had been before united. This was an example of
inconstancy in strong contrast with the conduct of their owner, who
chose death rather than become the wife of her lover’s conqueror.




Combustion.


It is necessary to distinguish between burning and the mere appearance
of it. A gas flame is gas in a state of combustion, whereas the
electric light is no example of it, although the wire within the
glassen cylinder is red hot, and to all appearance burning. Combustion
generally takes place through the strong affinity of some element, such
as carbon in a substance for the oxygen in the atmosphere. In coal gas,
for instance, the carbon contained in it unites with the oxygen in the
air to form a colorless substance called carbonic acid gas. The latter
is unable to support life, and may be called, therefore, poisonous. It
is the presence of this gas which makes it unhealthy to burn many jets
without proper ventilation.

Also, carbonic acid gas is given off by the lungs. It may seem
curious, but it is none the less true, that breathing is a process of
combustion. The blood brings to the surface of the lungs the carbon,
which has resulted from the waste of the internal organs of the body.
When drawing in a breath the oxygen present in the atmosphere meets the
impure blood at the surface of the lungs, and purifies it by uniting
with the carbon in it. Then, though oxygen has been breathed in,
carbonic acid gas has been breathed out.

To prove this will be interesting: Obtain from a chemist a little lime
water--two cents worth will do. It looks like ordinary water, being
perfectly transparent and colorless. Pour some into a clean glass, and
through a glass tube blow steadily into the water. In half a minute the
hitherto colorless liquid will become milky and opaque. If allowed to
stand there will fall down at the bottom of the glass a white powder.

What has happened in this case? The carbonic acid gas from the lungs
has formed with the lime in the lime water a substance called carbonate
of lime, which, being insoluble in water, falls to the bottom of the
glass as a white powder.

If carbonic acid gas were not present in the air blown from the lungs,
this milkiness would not appear, for no other gas, except this, would
alter the lime water’s clearness.




Chemistry of The Air.


Before proceeding further, it will be well to perform one or two
experiments, to prove that the air we breathe is by no means the simple
substance it is generally supposed to be. Although it is invisible, it
must be remembered that it presses with a force of over fifteen pounds
to the square inch, over the whole surface of the earth. It extends,
too, to a height of some forty miles above the earth, and though it
cannot be seen, it can be felt in the rush of the hurricane, and heard
in the roar of the tempest. It is chiefly composed of a mixture of two
gases, oxygen and nitrogen.

Did the air consist entirely of the former, people would breathe too
quickly, and die in a very short time in a high fever, burned up, in
fact. If only consisting of nitrogen, the human race would also die,
because this element is incapable of supporting life; people would be
suffocated, in fact.

Therefore, a judicious mixture of the two is essential to the life
of animals. Generally, in a hundred parts of air by weight there are
seventy-six parts of nitrogen to twenty-three of oxygen.

Besides these two gases, there is also a quantity of carbonic acid gas
in the air, given off by all the fires and animals in the world. Of
course, its amount is much greater in the great towns and manufacturing
centers than in country districts.

Now herein must be recorded one of these charming arrangements which
Nature has designed for the benefit of her children. Carbonic acid gas
is much heavier than the air, and, therefore, sinks towards the ground,
where, if allowed to accumulate, would cause the death of every animal.
Fortunately, however, plants breathe in through their leaves carbonic
acid gas during sunshine, and break it up into carbon and oxygen. The
former, they use for building up their trunks, leaves, and flowers,
while during the night they give off oxygen into the air.

This is the reason why plants and trees planted in the streets so
largely help to sweeten and purify the foul air of a great city.

       *       *       *       *       *

An experiment to prove that the atmosphere does consist of nitrogen
and oxygen, may be prettily proved in the following simple manner: A
glass marmalade jar, or a soup-plate filled with water, and a piece of
phosphorus as large as a pea, are the only things necessary. Take very
great care not to touch the phosphorus, for the heat of the hand is
sufficient to set it on fire, and a terrible wound would be caused.

Place the phosphorus in a match-box on the surface of the water, touch
it with a lighted match, and put the jar-mouth downwards over it to the
bottom of the plate. The phosphorus burns with a dazzling brilliancy,
and gives off dense white fumes. At the same time the water rises a
third of the way up the jar, but not to the top, thus showing that all
the invisible matter has not been consumed. The white soon settles into
the water and is dissolved. The phosphorus has combined with the oxygen
in the jar and forms phosphoric oxide, which dissolves in water. There
is then only the nitrogen left. The disappearance of the oxygen allows
the water to fill up the space it formerly occupied.

This may be followed by another experiment.

To show that oxygen is necessary for the support of combustion, fix
two or three pieces of wax taper on flat pieces of cork, and set them
floating on water in a soup-plate, light them, and invert over them a
glass jar.

As they burn, the heat produced may perhaps at first expand the air, so
as to force a small quantity out of the jar, but the water will soon
rise in the jar, and continue to do so until the tapers expire, when
you will find that a considerable portion of the air has disappeared,
and what remains will no longer support flame.

The oxygen has been converted partly into water, and partly into
carbonic acid gas, by uniting with the carbon and hydrogen of which
the taper consists, and the remaining air is principally nitrogen,
with some carbonic acid. The presence of the latter may be proved by
decanting some of the remaining air into a bottle, and then shaking
some lime water with it, which will absorb the carbonic acid and form
chalk.

Into an ale glass, two thirds full of water at about 140 degrees,
drop one or two pieces of phosphorus about the size of peas, and they
will remain unaltered. Then take a bladder containing oxygen gas, to
which is attached a stop cock and a long fine tube. Pass the end of
the tube to the bottom of the water, turn the stop cock, and press the
bladder gently. As the gas reaches the phosphorus it will take fire,
and burn under the water with a brilliant flame, filling the glass with
brilliant flashes of light dashing through the water.

Into another glass put some cold water; introduce carefully some of the
salt called chlorate of potash; upon that drop a piece of phosphorus;
then let some strong sulphuric acid (oil of vitriol) trickle slowly
down the side of the glass, or introduce it by means of a dropping
bottle.

As soon as the acid touches the salt the latter is decomposed, and
liberates a gas which ignites the phosphorus, producing much the same
appearance as in the last experiment.

Into the half of a broken phial put some chlorate of potash, and pour
in some oil of vitriol. The phial will soon be filled with a heavy gas
of a deep yellow color. Tie a small test tube at right angles to the
end of a stick not less than a yard long, put a little ether into the
tube, and pour it gently into the phial of gas, when an instantaneous
explosion will take place, and the ether will be set on fire. This
experiment should be performed in a place where there are no articles
of furniture to be damaged, as the ingredients are often scattered by
the explosion, and the oil of vitriol destroys all animal and vegetable
substances.

Into a jar containing oxygen gas introduce a coil of soft iron wire,
suspended to a cork that fits the neck of the jar and having attached
a small piece of charcoal to the lower part of the wire, ignite the
charcoal. The iron will take fire and burn with a brilliant light,
throwing out bright scintillations, which are oxide of iron, formed by
the union of the gas with the iron; and they are so intensely hot that
some of them will probably _melt_ their way into the sides of the jar,
if not through them.

But by far the most intense heat, and most brilliant light, may be
produced by introducing a piece of phosphorus into a jar of oxygen.
The phosphorus may be placed in a small copper cup, with a long handle
of thick wire passing through a hole in a cork that fits the jar. The
phosphorus must first be ignited; and as soon as it is introduced into
the oxygen, it gives out a light so brilliant that no eye can bear it,
and the whole jar appears filled with an intensely luminous atmosphere.
It is well to dilute the oxygen with about one-fourth part of common
air, to moderate the intense heat, which is nearly certain to break the
jar if pure oxygen is used.

The following experiment shows the production of heat by chemical
action alone: Bruise some fresh-prepared crystals of nitrate of copper,
spread them over a piece of tin foil, sprinkle them with a little
water; then fold up the foil tightly, as rapidly as possible, and in a
minute or two it will become red hot, the tin apparently burning away.
This heat is produced by the energetic action of the tin on the nitrate
of copper, taking away its oxygen in order to unite with the nitric
acid, for which, as well as for the oxygen the tin has a much greater
affinity than the copper has.

[Illustration]

Combustion without flame may be shown in a very elegant and agreeable
manner, by taking a coil of platinum wire and twisting it round the
stem of a tobacco pipe, or any cylindrical body for a dozen times or
so, leaving about an inch straight, which should be inserted into the
wick of a spirit lamp. Light the lamp, and after it has burned for a
minute or two, extinguish the flame quickly; the wire will soon become
red hot, and, if kept from draughts of air, will continue to burn
until all the spirit is consumed.

Spongy platinum, as it is called, answers rather better than wire, and
has been employed in the formation of fumigators for the drawing-room,
in which, instead of pure spirit, some perfume, such as lavender water,
is used; by its combustion an agreeable odor is diffused through the
apartment. These little lamps were much in vogue a few years ago, but
are now nearly out of fashion. Finally, all the readers of this little
book should be very careful in performing all experiments. If possible,
he should use a room with a stone floor and no curtains, while an
outhouse with an earthen floor is still less dangerous.




Amateur Air Pump.


A most interesting class of experiments can be made with an air pump, a
piece of apparatus unfortunately beyond the pocket-money supply of the
average boy. Nevertheless, if the following instructions are exactly
followed and carefully carried out, a very excellent air pump can be
made at a comparatively small cost. Some pretty, as well as interesting
results will amply repay you for the trouble you take to make the pump.
Although the air seems so light in comparison with water or a heavy
metal like iron, you must remember that it really presses upon every
square inch of the earth’s surface, aye, on every square inch of your
own bodies, with a force of fourteen and a half pounds. In other words,
the weight of the air at the sea level resting on each square inch of
surface weighs fourteen and a half pounds.

Don’t be frightened, boys, at the explanation of one word that must
be used in connection with air experiments. The word is vacuum.
Vacuum really means an empty space, devoid of all matter, even of
air. Although it seems easy to think of an empty space, it is quite
impossible to exhaust a space of all matter, even of air. For this
reason, the alchemists of the middle ages used to say: “Nature abhors
a vacuum.” This was only their way of saying how impossible it was to
make a space, such as the inside of a vessel, quite empty. Yet it is
possible to reduce the amount of air in a vessel almost to nothing.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Now for the pump. In the first place obtain three pieces of
gutta-percha tubing of the following lengths:

No. 1.--A tube twelve and a half inches long, measuring outside two and
a half, inside one and a half inches in circumference.

No. 2.--This must be seven and a half inches long, one and a half
inches outside, and an inch inside.

No. 3.--This is a length of tubing about sixty inches long, two and a
half inches in outside circumference, and at least an inch thick. If an
inch and a half thick all the better, as it will be more air-tight.

Divide tube No. 2 into two equal parts, cutting from right to left at
an angle of 45 degrees. Into one of the parts fit a plug of hard wood
pierced lengthwise by a red hot wire (fig. 1); the figure shows the
shape of it sufficiently. In the hollow side cut a small opening, and
over this tie very tightly a band of flexible india-rubber (fig. 3).
This band will serve as the valve of the piston of the pump. Figs. 3
and 4 give a side and front view of this valve. Great care must be
taken neither to split the plug in boring the hole nor to cut the tube.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

This valve must now be inserted in the large tube No. 1, as seen in
fig. 2.

At the other end of the large tube, which will serve as the body of
the pump, at B fig. 2, fix a similar valve to the above, but the
india-rubber band must be fixed on the other side of the valve as at B
fig. 2. The fitting A will serve for escape, the second for withdrawing
the air from the space to be exhausted. Finally fix tube No. 3 on
valves A or B, fig. 2, according to your wish to produce a vacuum or to
compress the air.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

By means of a pedal made simply with two boards put together on hinges
(fig. 5), one pressed with the foot, the air contained in the body of
the pump (fig. 2) tends to escape. It therefore lifts the valve of the
fitting fixed at A, and escapes through the flexible elastic band tied
over the hole in the hollow side of tube No. 2. If the pressure ceases
the big tube, on account of its own elasticity, takes its former form
and sucks in the air. This time it is the valve at B which is lifted
and lets pass the air which fills the body of the pump. If one has
fixed on to the fitting at B, the long india-rubber tube No. 3, which
is plunged in a receiver--a receiver is any vessel in which the air is
exhausted, or into which it is forced--it is easily understood that
after a few moves of the pedal, the air is drawn out, and a vacuum is
obtained.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

If one wishes to have a force-pump one has only to modify slightly the
construction of the valve. Instead of a band of india-rubber fixed as
shown in fig. 3, it is altered as in fig. 4, that is to say the valve
is formed by a band of supple india-rubber fastened by two tacks only
on one side of the opening in the side of the plug. For this object it
is also necessary to take stronger tubes.

Let us now review the few experiments that can be made with this
machine.

In order to conduct experiments a receiver must be obtained. The best
vessel for your purpose is a large bell-jar with a ground glass stopper
and neck to insure absolute tightness. Such a jar may be cheaply
obtained at a scientific instrument maker’s for about seventy-five
cents. If you cannot get a bell-jar procure a 4-lb. jam pot and a
tightly-fitting bung. In the middle of the latter bore a hole to admit
a glass tube, some six inches long and an inch in diameter, and then
sealing-wax the whole of the upper surface of the bung so that air
cannot enter. Over the projecting end of the glass tube, bind very
tightly the free end of the long tubing affixed to the pump. To ensure
tight binding, waxed thread should be used.




Asphyxia.


Put a mouse--it is necessary to catch him first--into the receiver, and
work the pump. Soon the animal will show all the signs of being choked,
and eventually will die. This is proof sufficient that animals cannot
live without air.

[Illustration]




Balloon in Vacuum.


Place in the receiver a small bladder, such as are sold in the streets
for a few cents. Wet it a little to make it more supple. Now, in the
ordinary way the air inside the bladder exerts the same pressure on
the skin of the bladder as does the air on the outside. Now work the
pedal so that the air in the receiver is gradually exhausted. The
bladder will be seen to gradually swell and finally burst. It bursts
because as the air in the receiver is exhausted by the pump, the air
outside the bladder exerts a less force than the air inside. But the
air inside is confined by the bladder skin, a not very strong material,
as you know, so as soon as the difference between the inside and
outside pressures is greater than the strength of the bladder, the
latter bursts. This experiment also shows the expansible power of air.

[Illustration]




Boiling Cold Water.


Place in the receiver a tumbler of cold water and work the pump as
before. In a few minutes, as soon as the air is sufficiently exhausted,
the water will apparently boil. Yet you know the water does not boil
in a kettle unless heated to 212 degrees. This phenomenon is thus
explained: The vacuum causes the air-bubbles contained in the water to
escape. They easily do so, because there is scarcely any reserve on the
surface of the liquid (see fig.).

[Illustration]




A Sucking Tube.


This force, the pressure of the air which you have just ascertained,
supplies various experiments in its illustration.

Take a tin tube, for example, the tin holder of a penny pen, which you
may procure at any stationer’s. Put a little water in it and make it
boil so that the steam takes the place of the air.

When steaming furiously stop the mouth of the tube with a small cork,
sealing the opening hermetically. Oil it a little, so it may glide with
ease. If you cool the tube by plunging it in a basin of cold water,
for example, the steam is condensed, forming a vacuum in the interior,
and under the atmospheric pressure the cork will glide down. Fasten
a string to the cork and you can withdraw it and begin the operation
again. As the water gets hot, steam is reformed; you will see the cork
come up again.

A capital way of making this cork is to stick the tube in a piece of
potato, cutting out of the latter a perfectly-fitting cork.

[Illustration]




Cupping.


Instead of a jar-receiver, take a long-necked bottle open at both ends.
If you place the hand on one of the open ends and exhaust the air, by
attaching the long tube of the pump to the other you cannot remove the
hand easily. Do not try to pump the air out entirely, as the suction
may be too strong and draw blood. It is by the rarefaction of the air
that the cupping-glass is applied to people who require bleeding. In
the antiquated surgical operation of cupping, the doctor burned a few
pieces of paper in small glass cups, which are then applied to the
skin; the air, in getting cold, contracted and produced a partial
vacuum, thus acting as the bottle did in the above experiment.

[Illustration]




The Barometer.


Now you shall learn something about the pressure exercised by the
atmospheric layer which surrounds the earth to the height of about
forty miles. This is done with the aid of a very well-known instrument
called the barometer.

You may construct one yourselves. Procure a glass tube closed at one
end, about a yard long and one tenth of an inch in diameter. Fill it
with mercury, then turn it upside down into a bowl filled with the same
metal, taking care that the air does not enter the tube. The column
will stop at a height between 29 and 30 inches.

This, therefore is the measure of the force of the air’s pressure, for
in the upper part of the tube there is an absolute vacuum and nothing
would prevent the mercury from going higher up. The weight of the
air layer corresponds, therefore, to a height of nearly 30 inches of
mercury.

[Illustration]

This weight has been before stated, viz., fourteen and a half pounds,
such a weight being supported by every single square inch of the
globe’s surface. A marvelous pressure is thus exerted on the whole
earth. In other words, the weight of the air that surrounds the
earth on all sides is no less than the following enormous number of
5,184,740,000,000,000 tons.

A man of average height, himself supports the enormous pressure of
34,171 pounds, or over 15 tons, and yet does not feel the least
inconvenience in his movements. It is because this pressure is
exercised in all directions, and a human body carries within it elastic
fluids that counterbalance that tremendous weight.

So accustomed do people become to this weight that when the weather is
stormy, a feeling of heaviness comes on.

However, it is just the contrary which takes place when the barometer
is lower; that is to say, the atmospheric pressure has diminished.
Consequently there is less weight to be carried.

You would experience the same sensation when going up in a balloon. As
you rise higher and higher the weight of the air is less felt, and this
makes people so uncomfortable that at a height of about 9,000 or 10,000
yards the liquids in our body--the blood, the water, the bile--tend to
escape outwards. Why? Because they are no longer balanced by an outside
pressure equal in force to them. In fact, if you continued to ascend,
your fate would be that of the bladder in the first experiment--you
would burst. Thus are you and all creatures attached to the face of the
earth, and it seems as if great heights were forbidden to our curiosity.




A Novel Barometer.


Construct a toy house of cardboard, painted, and let there be two
open doorways in the front, and let it stand on a wooden platform to
represent the ground. The two sides and back may come right down to the
ground, but there must be a slight space between the front of the house
and the ground upon which it stands.

Next make a flat wheel or disc of wood about the thickness of a penny,
its diameter or measurement across the center to measure the same as
the distance between the two doorways of the house. The wheel disc or
turn-table must have a shaft or spindle in the middle, so that it will
revolve easily in a hole made for it in the floor or ground which your
cardboard house stands on; this pivot-hole should be just within the
house and exactly half way between the two doors.

In the next place get two small dolls of such size that they will pass
easily through the doorways, or you may cut them out of cork or some
light substance. Dress one to represent an old man and the other as his
wife, and fix them opposite each other at the edge of the disc or wheel
in such a manner, that when it turns on its axle, the figures move in
and out of the two doorways provided for their accommodation, for it
appears that, although residing in the same house, they are not on very
good terms. When the husband goes out the wife remains at home, and as
she only ventures abroad in fine weather, her spouse is obliged to look
out when rain may be expected.

The motive power has now to be provided and this takes the form of
a piece of catgut, such as violin strings are made of; this is a
substance very susceptible of atmospheric influences, for dry weather
contracts or tightens it, while a damp atmosphere causes it to relax.
Double your catgut and twist it, fasten one end of the rope so formed
near the back of the house inside and fasten the other to the pivot
or axle, with two or three turns round it. As the weather changes the
tightening or relaxing of the rope will cause the figures to move in
and out of the house. Of course, the figures must be arranged so that
the lady comes out when the rope is tightened by the dryness of the
atmosphere.




Compressed Air.


To make experiments with compressed air, you must put your wits
together to make a reservoir. Air, you know, is a gas consisting of
particles called atoms. These atoms are at a certain distance from one
another. They can be pushed further from one another as when you heat
them, or closer together by cold and compression. So compressed air
only means air whose atoms are pressed more closely together than as
the case with the air around us.

Now you have heard that a column of air on a square inch weighs
fourteen and a half pounds. Also, you know that air in a receiver or
any other vessel presses on the vessel inside and out with a force (or
weight) of fourteen and a half pounds.

If now into the vessel you push another quantity of air, equal to the
vessel’s capacity, you simply push the atoms of air closer together.
In fact, they are now only half as far apart as the atoms of an open
vessel. But the pressure is doubled and the compressed air, therefore,
will press on the inside of the vessel with a force of twenty-nine
pounds.

[Illustration]

Now to make the reservoir. Get a tin tube about 40 inches long and
four in diameter, closed at both ends. Take care that the soldering
is well done. Two openings must be made, and a small tube inserted in
each. To each of these attach an indiarubber tube, one four feet long,
and the other six. (See fig.).

To fill this reservoir with compressed air, apply the air-pump fitted
with the valve shown in fig. 4, in the description of an air-pump.
Squeeze tightly the upper tube of the reservoir before beginning to
pump, and then it will be easy to judge the amount of compression of
the air. For the first experiment place a light ball or sheet of paper
over the mouth of the tube, and loosen your hold on it. The object will
immediately be blown away with considerable force.




Noiseless Bell.


We know that sound is a succession of vibrations which must be
transmitted in a medium with weight, as air or water; in other words,
in a vacuum there can be no sound at all. To prove this, introduce
into the receiver a small bell, and as the air is extracted the sounds
become weaker and weaker, and cease altogether when the air is
completely rarified.

[Illustration]




The Bursting Bladder.


Tie a thin piece of light indiarubber round the top of the bottle, and
you will notice that as the air is withdrawn, the indiarubber will
stretch, and at length form a round small balloon in the interior of
the bottle. (Fig. 1).

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

If a piece of bladder is tightly stretched and tied round the vessel
(fig. 2.) it will burst under the force of the atmospheric pressure
which acts upon it, through a vacuum having been made underneath. This
is another case of the first experiment with the air pump described
above.




Weight of the Air.


Another experiment will still better make you appreciate the value of
this factor: the weight of the air.

Put a piece of supple leather in which a ring is attached under the
bottle; pump the air out of the latter and you will be astonished at
the weight you may hang on this leather without dragging it off.

[Illustration]

Should you not have at hand a glass receiver, a wooden reel may serve
instead (see fig.). On one of its faces place a piece of strong
cardboard, in the middle of which a hook has been fastened; when the
rarefaction is made, rather heavy weights must be hooked on before the
cardboard is detached from the face of the rest.




Spoons which will Melt in Hot Water.


Fuse together in a crucible, eight parts of bismuth, five of lead and
three of tin; these metals will combine and form an alloy, of which
spoons may be made, possessed of the remarkable property of melting in
boiled water.




Effect of Compression.


Take a wooden reel and hollow out either the top or bottom, beginning
at the hole in the center and working towards the edge. In the hollow
place a ball. Apply to the other end the indiarubber tube which
conducts the forced air, and the ball will be lifted up (see fig.).

[Illustration]




To Cover Iron with Copper.


If you are about to perform a conjuring trick, you will, of course take
great care that your apparatus is ready. Therefore, clean your piece
of iron or steel from dirt. Dip a piece of polished iron--the blade
of your knife, for instance--into a solution, either of nitrate or
sulphate of copper, when it will assume the appearance of a piece of
pure copper.




The Elements.


Before entering into the next series of experiments the young chemist
must know that all the substances of which the world and everything in
it are made up--_i.e._, the elements are arranged in two classes, the
metals and the non-metals. The former are by far the more numerous,
altogether numbering more than fifty. Among the better known are
such well known substances as iron, mercury, copper, tin, potassium,
antimony, strontium, and nickel. The non-metals are more widely
distributed and together made up of the bulk of the universe.

They comprise the gases--oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and chlorine,
and such substances as sulphur, carbon, phosphorus and iodine. To the
latter class also belongs a peculiar element called fluorine, which,
when combined with hydrogen, destroys glass. It is the only liquid
known which cannot be contained in a glassen or earthenware vessel, and
when used for experimental purposes must be kept in a leaden bottle.

Of course it will be understood that the above is not a complete
list by any means, but is sufficient to give a clear idea of the
difference between the two classes. The metals generally speaking are
of a more or less sparkling, lustrous appearance. The metals, too, are
good conductors of heat and electricity, and generally heavy. These
characteristics are almost entirely wanting in the non-metals. We shall
now give some tricks with the metals.




Potassium.


Potassium was discovered by Sir H. Davy, in the beginning of the
present century, while acting upon potash with the enormous galvanic
battery of the Royal Institution, consisting of two thousand pairs of
four inch plates. It is a brilliant metal, so soft as to be easily cut
with a penknife, and so light as to swim upon water, on which it acts
with great energy, uniting with the oxygen and liberating the hydrogen,
which takes fire as it escapes.

Trace some continuous lines on paper with a camel’s-hair brush dipped
in water, and place a piece of potassium about the size of a pea on one
of the lines, and it will follow the course of the pencil, taking fire
as it runs, and burning with a purplish light.

The paper will be found covered with a solution of ordinary potash. If
turmeric paper be used, the course of the potassium will be marked with
a deep brown color. Hence if you touch potassium with wet fingers you
will burn them.

If a small piece of the metal be placed on a piece of ice, it will
instantly take fire, and form a deep hole which will be found to
contain a solution of potash.

In consequence of its great affinity for oxygen, potassium must be kept
in some fluid destitute of it, such as naphtha acid, which has been
displaced by the great affinity or liking of the oxygen and acid for
the copper.

2. When the copper is no longer coated, but remains clean and bright
when immersed in the fluid, all the silver has been deposited, and the
glass now contains a solution of copper.

Nearly all the colors used in the arts are produced by metals and
their combinations; indeed, one is named chromium, from a Greek word
signifying color, on account of the beautiful tints obtained from its
various combinations with oxygen and the other metals. All the various
tints, of green, orange, yellow and red are obtained from this metal.

Solutions of most of the metallic salts give precipitates with
solutions of alkalies and their salts, as well as with many other
substances, such as what are usually called prussiate of potash,
hydrosulphret of ammonia, etc. The colors differ according to the metal
employed; and so small a quantity is required to produce the color,
that the solutions before mixing may be nearly colorless.




Metallic Colors.


To a solution of sulphate of iron add a drop or two of a solution of
prussiate of potash, and a blue color will be produced.

2. Substitute sulphate of copper for iron, and the color will be a rich
brown.

3. Another blue, of quite a different tint, may be produced by letting
a few drops of a solution of ammonia fall into one of sulphate of
copper, when a precipitate of a light blue falls down, which is
dissolved by an additional quantity of the ammonia, and forms a
transparent solution of the most splendid rich blue color.

4. Into a solution of sulphate of iron, drop a few drops of strong
infusion of galls, and the color will become a bluish black--in fact
ink. A little tea will answer as well as the infusion of galls.
This is the reason why certain stuffs formerly in general use for
dressing-gowns for gentlemen were so objectionable; for as they were
indebted to a salt of iron for their color, buff as it was called, a
drop of tea accidentally spilled produced all the effect of a drop of
ink.

5. Put into a largish test tube two or three small pieces of granulated
zinc, fill it about one-third full of water, put in a few grains of
iodine, and boil the water, which will at first acquire a dark purple
color, gradually fading as the iodine combines with the zinc. Add a
little more iodine from time to time, until the zinc is nearly all
dissolved. If a few drops of this solution be added to an equally
colorless solution of corrosive sublimate (a salt of mercury), a
precipitate will take place of a splendid scarlet color, brighter, if
possible, than vermilion, which is also a preparation of mercury.




Crystallization of Metals.


Some of the metals assume certain definite forms in return from the
fluid to the solid state. Bismuth shows this property more readily than
most others.


EXPERIMENT.

Melt a pound or two of bismuth in an iron ladle over the fire; remove
it as soon as the whole is fluid; and when the surface has become
solid break a hole in it and pour out the still fluid metal from the
interior; what remains will exhibit beautifully formed crystals of a
cubic shape.

Sulphur may be crystallized in the same manner, but its fumes, when
heated, are so very unpleasant that few would wish to encounter them.

One of the most remarkable facts in chemistry--a science abounding in
wonders--is the circumstance that the mere contact of hydrogen, the
lightest body known, with the metal platinum, the heaviest when in a
state of minute division called spongy platinum, produces an intense
heat sufficient to inflame the hydrogen; of course this experiment must
be made in the presence of atmospheric air or oxygen. If a small piece
of the metal in the state above named be introduced into a mixture
of oxygen and hydrogen, it will cause them to explode. A very small
quantity of gas should be employed and placed in a jar lightly covered
with a card, or the explosion would be dangerous.




Crystallization.


Nearly all the metals are characterized by the crystals, which
are formed as they pass from a state of intense heat to that of
comparative coldness. It is by this process they have been formed when
in the mine or vein in the rocks. The earth was once a fiery mass
of molten matter, as seen even now when a volcano is in a state of
eruption. And it was only by the cooling of the outside shell of the
earth, or crust, as it is called, that it became habitable.

When the crust was cooling down the metals crystallized among the
cooling rocks and gradually formed the crude arts. You may represent by
a very pretty experiment the manner in which this cooling off of the
earth took place. Obtain a little flour of sulphur and put it in a red
earthenware unglazed jar. Thrust it well into the fire and watch the
rust. As soon as the heat has penetrated the vessel the yellow powdery
sulphur becomes first of all brown, and then assumes the consistency
of thick birdlime. Take out a little of this on the end of a stick and
plunge it into cold water. It can then be pulled backwards and forwards
like cobblers’ wax. This well represents the state of the half-cooled
crust of the earth.

Meanwhile the sulphur on the fire begins to boil, and looks very much
like bubbling treacle. Remove it from the fire and allow it to cool.
When quite cool the surface will be a flat, yellow mass, like ordinary
roll sulphur, which, when ground, give the ordinary flour of sulphur.

With a sharp knife separate the mass from the vessel and look at the
under-surface. There it will be found to have assumed a very different
form, owing to the exclusion of the air, and consequent slower cooling.
Large six-sided crystals, transparent, and of a most exquisitely
delicate yellow, will be seen, piled on one another as appear the
masses of ore in rocks.

Nature always works in such cases on such a gigantic scale that it
seems at first difficult to believe that such huge piles as the Giant’s
Causeway in Ireland, or Fingals in Scotland, or the lodes of tin ore in
Cornwall, worked by the Phœnicians three thousand years ago, and still
being worked, were all formed by the same process.

The time that the earth must have taken to cool fairly staggers the
imagination, yet it is only from guessing, by means of such a study as
this, that geologists are able to form any idea of how long ago it was
that the earth’s crust became cool enough to allow animal and plant
life to exist upon it.

The most beautiful crystalline form is perhaps the diamond, and yet
this precious gem is but the same thing, chemically, as charcoal.
Charcoal is pure carbon in the uncrystallized state, which the magic
of crystallization has transformed into the symbol of all that is
brilliant and beautiful.




Beauties of Crystallization.


Dissolve alum in hot water until no more can be dissolved in it; place
in it a smooth glass rod and a stick of the same size. Next day the
stick will be found covered with crystals, but the glass rod will be
free from them. In this case the crystals cling to the rough surface of
the stick, but have no hold upon the smooth surface of the glass rod.

But if the rod be roughened with a file at certain intervals, and then
placed in the alum and water, the crystals will adhere to the rough
surfaces, and leave the smooth bright and clear.

Tie some threads of lamp-cotton irregularly around a copper wire or
glass rod. Place it in a hot solution of blue vitriol, strong as above,
and the threads will be covered with beautiful blue crystals, while the
glass rod will be bare.

Bore a hole through a piece of coke, and suspend it by a string from a
stick placed across a hot solution of alum. It will float. But as it
becomes loaded with crystals it will sink in the solution according to
the length of the string. Gas-coke has mostly a smooth, shining, and
almost metallic surface, which the crystals will avoid, while they will
cling only to the most irregular and porous parts.

If powdered turmeric be added to the hot solution of alum the crystals
will be of a bright yellow. Litmus will cause them to be of a bright
red. Logwood will yield purple; and common writing ink, black. And the
more muddy the solution the finer will be the crystals.

To keep colored alum crystals from breaking or losing their color,
place them under a glass shade with a saucer of water.

This will preserve the atmosphere moist, and prevent the crystals
getting too dry.

If crystals be formed on wire they will be liable to break off, from
the expansion and contraction of the wire by changes of temperature.




To Crystallize Camphor.


Dissolve camphor in spirit of wine, moderately heated, until the
spirit will not dissolve any more; pour some of the solution into a
cold glass, and the camphor will instantly crystallize in beautiful
tree-like forms, such as we see in the show-glasses of camphor in
druggists’ windows.


ANOTHER EXPERIMENT.

Heat some blue vitriol (sulphate of copper) in an iron ladle till
all the water contained in the crystals is driven off, and the color
changes to a gray. Take the lumps out without breaking them, and
lay the dried blue vitriol on a plate. If this be moistened with
water steam is produced; and if a slice of phosphorus is then laid
on the sulphate of copper it ignites, demonstrating again that the
condensation of a liquid produces heat. The addition of the water
restores the blue color, thus proving that water was necessary to the
composition of blue vitriol.




A Solid Changed to a Liquid.


Mix five parts by weight of powdered sal ammoniac, five parts of nitre
in powder, and sixteen parts of water. A temperature of twenty-two
degrees below the freezing point of water is produced; and if a phial
of water, or any convenient metallic cylinder containing water, be
surrounded with a sufficient quantity of the freezing mixture, ice is
formed. The ice clings to the interior of the tube, but may easily be
removed by dipping it in tepid water.

This experiment is the reverse of the last and proves that the sudden
reduction of a solid to the liquid condition always affords cold.

An amusing combination of two experiments may be made by putting some
fresh-burned lime into one tea pot and this freezing mixture into
another. When water is poured on the one containing lime, it gives
out steam from the spout, while the addition of water to the other
produces so much cold that it can hardly be kept in the hand. Thus heat
and cold are afforded through the same medium, water.




Magic of Heat.


Melt a small quantity of the sulphate of potash and copper in a spoon
over a spirit lamp. It will be fused at a heat just below redness,
and produce a liquid of a dark-green color. Remove the spoon from the
flame, when the liquid will become a solid of a brilliant emerald green
color, and so remain until its heat sinks nearly to that of boiling
water, when suddenly a commotion will take place throughout the mass,
beginning from the surface, and each atom, as if animated, will start
up and separate itself from the rest, till in a few moments the whole
will become a heap of powder.




Sublimation by Heat.


Provide two small pieces of glass; sprinkle a minute portion of
sulphur upon one piece, lay thin slips of wood around it, and place
upon it the other piece of glass. Move them slowly over the flame of a
lamp or candle, and the sulphur will become sublimed, and form gray,
nebulous patches, which are very curious microscopic objects. Each
cluster consists of thousands of transparent globules, imitating in
miniature the nebulæ which we see figured in treatises on astronomy.
By observing the largest particles we shall find them to be flattened
on one side. Being very transparent, each of them acts the part of
a little lens, and forms in its focus the image of a distant light,
which can be perceived even in the smaller globules, until it vanishes
from minuteness. If they are examined again after a certain number of
hours, the smaller globules will generally be found to have retained
their transparency, while the larger ones will have become opaque, in
consequence of the sulphur having undergone some internal spontaneous
change. But the most remarkable circumstance attending this experiment
is that the globules are found adhering to the upper glass only;
the reason of which is that the upper glass is somewhat cooler than
the lower one, by which means we see that the vapor of sulphur is
very powerfully repelled by heated glass. The flattened form of the
particles is owing to the force with which they endeavor to recede from
the lower glass, and their consequent pressure against the surface of
the upper one. This experiment is considered by its originator, Mr.
H. F. Talbot, to be a satisfactory argument in favor of the repulsive
power of heat.




Heat Passing Through Glass.


Although glass is a bad conductor it yet allows heat to pass through
it, and the purer the glass the more easy is this done. Heat a poker
red hot, and having opened a window, apply the poker very near to
the outside of the pane, and the hand to the inside. A strong heat
will be felt at the instant, which will cease as soon as the poker is
withdrawn, and may be again renewed and made to cease as quickly as
before. It is well known that if a piece of glass be so much warmed as
to convey the impression of heat to the hand, it will retain some part
of that heat for a minute or more; but in this experiment the heat will
vanish in a moment. It will not, therefore, be the heated pane of glass
that we shall feel, but heat which has come through the glass in a free
or radiant state.




Metals Unequally Influenced by Heat.


All metals do not conduct heat at the same rate as may be proved by
holding in the flame of a candle at the same time a piece of silver
wire and a piece of platina wire, when the silver wire will become too
hot to hold, much sooner than the platina. Or cut a cone of each wire,
tip it with wax, and place it upon a heated plate (as a fire-shovel),
when the wax will melt at different periods.




Spontaneous Combustion.


Mix a small quantity of chlorate of potash with spirit of wine in a
strong saucer; add a little sulphuric acid, and an orange vapor will
arise and burst into flame with a loud crackling sound.




Inequality of Heat in Fire-Irons.


Place before a fire a set of polished fire-irons, and beside them a
rough, unpolished poker, such as is used in the kitchen, instead
of a bright poker. The polished irons will remain for a long time
without becoming warmer than the temperature of the room, because
the heat radiated from the fire is all reflected, or thrown off, by
the polished surface of the irons, and none of it is absorbed. The
rough poker will, however, become speedily hot, so as not to be used
without inconvenience. Hence, the polish of fire-irons is not merely
ornamental, but useful.




Expansion of Metal by Heat.


Provide an iron rod, and fit it exactly into a metal ring; heat the rod
red hot, and it will no longer enter the ring.

Observe an iron gate on a warm day, when it will shut with difficulty;
whereas it will shut loosely and easily on a cold day.




The Alchemist’s Ink.


Dissolve in water a small quantity, about as much as will lay on a
ten-cent piece, of chloride of cobalt, which is of a bluish-green
color, and the solution will be pink; write with it and the characters
will scarcely be visible; but if gently heated they will appear in
brilliant green, which will disappear as the paper cools.

Dissolve in water a few grains of prussiate of potash; write with this
liquid, which is invisible when dry; wash over with a dilute solution
of iron, made by dissolving a nail in a little aqua fortis; a blue and
legible writing is immediately apparent.




Chameleon Liquids.


Put a small portion of the compound called mineral chameleon into
several glasses. Pour upon each water at different temperatures and
the contents of each glass will exhibit a different shade of color. A
very hot solution will be of a beautiful green color; a cold one a deep
purple.

Make a colorless solution of sulphate of copper; add to it a little
ammonia equally colorless, and the mixture will be of an intense blue
color; add to it a little sulphuric acid, and the blue color will
disappear; pour in a little solution of caustic ammonia, and the blue
color will be restored. Thus may the liquor be changed at pleasure.




Magic Dyes.


Dissolve indigo in diluted sulphuric acid, and add to it an equal
quantity of solution of carbonate of potash. If a piece of white cloth
be dipped in the mixture it will be changed to blue; yellow cloth, in
the same mixture, may be changed to green; red to purple; and blue
litmus paper to red.

Nearly fill a wine glass with the juice of beet-root, which is of
a deep red color; add a little lime water and the mixture will be
colorless; dip into it a piece of white cloth, dry it rapidly, and in a
few hours the cloth will become red.




Wine Changed into Water.


Mix a little solution of subacetate of lead with port wine; filter
the mixture through blotting-paper, and a colorless liquid will pass
through; to this add a small quantity of dry salt of tartar; distill in
a retort, when a spirit will arise, which may be inflamed.




The Chemistry of Water.


More than two-thirds of the earth’s surface is water, so that in mere
quantity alone it is the most important substance with which we are
acquainted. Without it life would be impossible, for, owing to its
quality of dissolving other bodies, it may be regarded as the great
purifier, as well as the vehicle which brings nourishment to plants and
animals alike.

Not only is water useful, but is among the most beautiful of Nature’s
products. It has carved the valleys between mountain ranges by its slow
dropping for ages, and has made the fairy glens by rushing down their
sides in torrents. The stately rivers and the roaring oceans are but
forms of its might.

In another state it works out those fantastic grottoes, mountains and
fields of glittering white, that make the Polar seas the very head
center of dreamland.

In still another form it paints the rainbow in the sky, and hangs like
a veil over the landscape, passing from the most delicate blue over the
plain to the deep purple clinging to distant hills.

To it the golden and red hues of sunrise and sunset are due. The light
fleecy clouds that speak the beauty of spring, and the great thunder
stocks that gleam, with lightning flashes are all composed of water,
and water alone.

It drives our engines and machinery, and speeds our ships across the
sea. Neither is it confined to this earth alone, for astronomers tell
us that vast seas and even clouds can be seen on the next great planet
to the earth, Mars.

Surely, then, as this wondrous substance is examined, the ancients can
be excused for worshiping the ocean as a god, and the old alchemists
for believing it to be an element.

Nevertheless, water is not a simple substance. It is composed of two
gases, which must be combined before water is produced. These gases are
oxygen and hydrogen. Every atom of water consists of one part of the
former gas and two parts by volume of the latter. This you may prove in
the following way:

Buy a piece of sodium, a metal that must not be touched with the
fingers, and thrust it into a small one-ounce jar half full of water;
cork the jar tightly.

Through a hole in the cork pass a glass tube, the outer end being drawn
in a flame to a fine point. Apply a light at the end of the tube. The
escaping gas will catch fire and burn with a light blue flame. This gas
is hydrogen.

Next empty the jar and fill with warm water, and place by means of
another cork a small glass jar on to the tube. Into the lower jar drop
a piece of blazing hot platinum. Repeat this again and again with the
same piece of platinum, being careful not to uncork the upper jar, so
that every time the metal is dropped into the lower jar, you remove
the upper jar with the tube and two corks. After doing this a dozen
times or more take a match that is still glowing after having been
extinguished, and plunge it into the upper jar. It will burst into
flame immediately, and the gas in the upper jar is oxygen.




Two Bitters Make a Sweet.


It has been discovered that a mixture of nitrate of silver with
hyposulphite of soda, both of which are remarkably bitter, will produce
the sweetest known substance.




Visible and Invisible.


Write with French chalk on a looking-glass; wipe it with a handkerchief
and the lines will disappear; breathe on it and they will reappear.
This alteration will take place for a great number of times, and after
the lapse of a considerable period.




To Form a Liquid from Two Solids.


Rub together in a mortar a small quantity of sulphate of soda and
acetate of lead, and as they mix they will become liquid.

Carbonate of ammonia and sulphate of copper, previously reduced to
powder separately, will also, when mixed, become liquid, and acquire a
most splendid blue color.

The greater number of salts have a tendency to assume regular forms, or
become _crystallized_, when passing from the fluid to the solid state;
and the size and regularity of the crystals depends in a great measure
on the slow or rapid escape of the fluid in which they were dissolved.

Sugar is a capital example of this property; the ordinary loaf-sugar
being rapidly boiled down, as it is called; while to make rock-candy,
which is nothing but sugar in a crystallized form, the solution is
allowed to evaporate slowly, and as it cools it forms into those
beautiful crystals termed rock-candy. The threads found in the center
of some of the crystals are merely placed for the purpose of hastening
the formation of the crystals.




Restoration of Color by Water.


Water being a colorous fluid ought, one would imagine when mixed with
other substances of no decided color, to produce a colorless compound.
Nevertheless, it is to water only that blue vitriol or sulphate of
copper owes its vivid blueness, as will be plainly evinced by the
following simple experiment. Heat a few crystals of the vitriol in
a fire-shovel, pulverize them, and the powder will be of a dull and
dirty white appearance. Pour a little water upon this when a slight
hissing noise will be heard, and at the same moment the blue color will
instantly reappear.

Under the microscope the beauty of this experiment will be increased,
for the instant that a drop of water is placed in contact with the
vitriol, the powder may be seen to shoot into blue prisms. If a crystal
of prussiate of potash be similarly heated its yellow color will
vanish, but reappear on being dropped into water.




Two Liquids Make a Solid.


Dissolve chloride of lime in water until it will dissolve no more;
measure out an equal quantity of oil of vitriol; both will be
transparent fluids; but if equal quantities of each be slowly mixed and
stirred together, they will become a solid mass, with the evolution of
smoke or fumes.




Two Solids Make a Liquid.


Rub together in a mortar equal quantities of the crystals of Glauber
salts and nitrate of ammonia, and the two salts will slowly become a
liquid.




A Solid Opaque Mass Makes a Transparent Liquid.


Take the solid mixture of the solutions of muriate of lime and
carbonate of potash, pour upon it a very little nitric acid, and the
solid opaque mass will be changed to a transparent liquid.




Two Cold Liquids Make a Hot One.


Mix four drams of sulphuric acid (oil of vitriol) with one dram of cold
water, suddenly, in a cup, and the mixture will be nearly half as hot
again as boiling water.




To Make Ice.


Although this trick is performed by means of chemicals, yet its product
is obtained really by the use of mechanical laws. We must remember that
ice is exactly the same thing as water so far as its composition is
concerned, differing only in its state of density.

Ice, water, and steam differ in density through the possession of a
greater or less quantity of heat. Hence, the turning of water into ice
really is a case of the operation of mechanical laws.

Now for the experiment. Put into a wide-mouthed jam-jar a smaller
glass vessel containing the water to be frozen. Around the latter put
a mixture of sulphate of soda (Glauber’s salt) and hydrochloric acid
(spirits of salts). The proportions must be eight parts of the former
to five of the latter.

The action of these two chemicals on one another is to cause a cold of
fifteen to seventeen degrees below zero, or forty-seven degrees below
freezing point.

The same result may be obtained by mixing equal parts of nitrate of
ammonia and water. In winter-time when the snow is on the ground, with
a mixture of one part snow and one part common table salt an intense
cold of twenty degrees below zero is obtained.

From this last fact we see how stupid are those people who sprinkle the
salt on the pavements to get rid of the snow. True, the latter melts,
but only after the production of intense cold, which is the cause of
many diseases, not only slight ones like colds and chilblains, but too
often the forerunners of consumption and other lung troubles.




Curious Change of Colors.


Let there be no other light than a taper in the room; then put on a
pair of dark-green spectacles, and having closed one eye view the taper
with the other. Suddenly remove the spectacles and the taper will
assume a bright red appearance; but if the spectacles be instantly
replaced, the eye will be unable to distinguish anything for a second
or two. The order of colors will therefore be as follows: green, red,
green, black.




The Protean Light.


Soak a cotton wick in a strong solution of salt and water, dry it,
place it in a spirit lamp, and when lit it will give a bright yellow
light for a long time. If you look through a piece of blue glass at the
flame, it will lose all its yellow light and you will only perceive
feeble violet rays. If before the blue glass you place a pale yellow
glass, the lamp will be absolutely invisible, though a candle may be
distinctly seen through the same glasses.




To Change the Colors of Flowers.


Hold over a lighted match a purple columbine or a blue larkspur, and
it will change first to pink and then to black. The yellow of other
flowers held as above will continue unchanged.

Thus, the purple tint will instantly disappear from a heart’s-ease, but
the yellow will remain; and the yellow of a wall-flower will continue
the same, though the brown streak will be discharged. If a scarlet,
crimson, or maroon dahlia be tried, the color will change to yellow,
a fact known to gardeners, who by this mode variegate their growing
dahlias.




Changes of the Poppy.


Some flowers which are red, become blue by merely bruising them. Thus,
if the petals of the common corn-poppy be rubbed upon white paper, they
will stain it purple, which may be made green by washing it over with a
strong solution of potash in water. Put poppy petals into very dilute
muriatic acid, and the infusion will be of a florid red color; by
adding a little chalk, it will become the color of port wine; and this
tint, by the addition of potash may be changed to green or yellow.




Changes of the Rose.


Hold a red rose over the blue flame of a common match and the color
will be discharged wherever the fume touches the leaves of the flower,
so as to render it beautifully variegated, or entirely white. If it be
then dipped into water, the redness, after a time, will be restored.




Marking Indelibly.


Write upon linen with permanent ink (which is a strong solution of
nitrate of silver), and the characters will be scarcely visible; remove
the linen to a dark room, and they will not change; but expose them to
a strong light, and they will be of an indelible black.




Visible Growth.


Cut a circular piece of card to fit the top of a hyacinth glass, so as
to rest upon the ledge, and exclude the air. Pierce a hole through the
center of the card, and pass through it a strong thread, having a small
piece of wood tied to one end, which, resting transversely on the card,
prevents it being drawn through. To the other end of the thread attach
an acorn; and having half filled the glass with water, suspend the
acorn at a short distance from the surface.

The glass must be kept in a warm room, and in a few days the steam will
hang from the acorn in a drop, the skin will burst, and the root will
protrude and thrust itself in the water, and in a few days more a stem
will shoot out at the other end, and rising upwards, will press against
the card, in which an orifice must be made to allow it to pass through.
From this stem small leaves will soon be observed to sprout; and in
the course of a few weeks you will have a handsome oak plant, several
inches in height.




Colored Flames.


A variety of rays of light are exhibited by colored flames, which are
not to be seen in white light. Thus pure hydrogen gas will burn with a
blue flame, in which many of the rays of light are wanting.

The flame of an oil lamp contains most of the rays which are wanting in
the sunlight. Alcohol mixed with water, when heated or burned, affords
a flame with no other rays but yellow. The following salts, if finely
powdered, and introduced into the exterior flame of a candle, or into
the wick of a spirit lamp, will communicate to the flame their peculiar
colors:

  Chloride of Soda (common salt)  Yellow.
     “     of Potash              Pale violet.
     “     of Lime                Brick red.
     “     of Strontia            Bright crimson.
     “     of Lithia              Red.
     “     of Baryta              Apple green.
     “     of Copper              Bluish green.
  Borax                           Yellow.

Or either of the above salts may be mixed with spirit of wine, as
directed, for Red Fire.


ORANGE COLORED FLAME.

Burn spirit of wine on chloride of calcium, a substance obtained by
evaporating muriate of lime to dryness.


EMERALD GREEN FLAME.

Burn spirit of wine on a little powdered nitrate of silver.


INSTANTANEOUS FLAME.

Heat together potassium and sulphur, and they will instantly burn very
vividly.

Heat a little nitre on a fire-shovel, sprinkle on it flour of sulphur,
and it will instantly burn. If iron filings be thrown upon red hot
nitre, they will detonate and burn.




Water of Different Temperatures in the Same Vessel.


Of heat and cold, as of wit and madness, it may be said that “thin
partitions do their bounds divide.” Thus, paint one half of the surface
of a tin pot with a mixture of lamp black and size, and leave the other
half or side bright; fill the vessel with boiling water, and by dipping
a thermometer, or even the finger, into it shortly after, it will be
found to cool much more rapidly upon the blackened than the bright side
of the pot.




Warmth of Different Colors.


Place upon the surface of snow, as upon the window-sill, in bright
daylight or sunshine, pieces of cloth of the same size and quality, but
of different colors, black, blue, green, yellow and white; the black
cloth will soon melt the snow beneath it, and sink downwards; next the
blue, and then the green; the yellow but slightly; but the snow beneath
the white cloth will be as firm as at first.




Laughing Gas.


The above fanciful appellation has been given to nitrous oxide, from
the very agreeable sensations excited by inhaling it. In its pure state
it destroys animal life, but loses this noxious quality when inhaled,
because it becomes blended with the atmospheric air which it meets in
the lungs. This gas is made by putting three or four drams of nitrate
of ammonia in crystals into a small glass retort, which being held
over a spirit lamp, the crystals will melt, and the gas be evolved.

Having thus produced the gas, it is to be passed into a large bladder
having a stop-cock; and when you are desirous of exhibiting its effects
you cause the person who wishes to experience them to first exhale
the atmospheric air from the lungs, and then quickly placing the cock
in his mouth you turn it, and bid him inhale the gas. Immediately a
sense of extraordinary cheerfulness, fanciful flights of imagination,
an uncontrollable propensity to laughter, and a consciousness of being
capable of great muscular exertion, supervene. It does not operate
in exactly the same manner on all persons; but in most cases the
sensations are agreeable, and have this important difference from those
produced by wine or spirituous liquors, that they are not succeeded by
any depression of mind.




Magic Vapor.


Provide a glass tube about three feet long and half an inch in
diameter; nearly fill it with water, upon the surface of which pour a
little colored ether; then close the open end of the tube carefully
with the palm of the hand, invert it in a basin of water, and rest the
tube against the wall. The ether will rise through the water to the
upper end of the tube; pour a little hot water over the tube, and it
will soon cause the ether to boil within, and its vapor may thus be
made to drive nearly all of the water out of the tube into the basin.
If, however, you then cool the tube by pouring cold water over it, the
vaporized ether will again become a liquid, and float upon the water as
before.




Gas from the Union of Metals.


Nearly fill a wine glass with diluted sulphuric acid, and place in it a
wire of silver and another of zinc, taking care that they do not touch
each other, when the zinc will be changed by the acid, but the silver
will remain inert. But cause the upper ends of the wires to touch each
other, and a stream of gas will issue from them.




Green Fire.


A beautiful green fire may be thus made: Take of flour of sulphur
thirteen parts, nitrate of baryta seventy-seven, chlorate of potash
five, metallic arsenic two, and charcoal three. Let the nitrate
of baryta be well dried and powdered; then add to it the other
ingredients, all finely pulverized, and exceedingly well mixed and
rubbed together. Place a portion of the composition in a small tin
pan, having a polished reflector fitted to one side, and set light to
it, when a splendid green illumination will be the result. By adding a
little calamine it will burn more slowly.




Combustion of Three Metals.


Mix a grain or two of potassium with an equal quantity of sodium; add
a globule of quicksilver, and the three metals, when shaken, will take
fire and burn vividly.




To Make Paper Apparently Incombustible.


Take a smooth cylindrical piece of metal, about one inch and a half in
diameter, and eight inches long. Wrap very closely round it a piece of
clean writing paper, then hold the paper in the flame of a spirit lamp,
and it will not take fire. But it may be held there for a considerable
time without being in the least affected by the flame. If the paper be
strained over a cylinder of wood it is quickly scorched.




Heat Not to be Estimated by Touch.


Hold both hands in water which causes the thermometer to rise to ninety
degrees, and when the liquid has become still, you will be insensible
to the heat, and that the hand is touching anybody. Then remove one
hand to water that causes the thermometer to rise to two hundred
degrees, and the other in water at thirty-two degrees.

After holding the hands thus for some time remove them, and again
immerse them in the water at ninety degrees. Then you will find warmth
in one hand and cold in the other. To the hand which had been immersed
in the water at thirty-two degrees, the water at ninety degrees will
feel hot; and to the hand which had been immersed in the water at two
hundred degrees, the water at ninety degrees will feel cool. If,
therefore, the touch in this case be trusted, the same water will be
judged to be hot and cold at the same time.




Flame Upon Water.


Fill a wine glass with cold water, pour lightly upon its surface a
little ether; light it by a slip of paper, and it will burn for some
time.




Rose-colored Flame Upon Water.


Drop a globule of potassium, about the size of a large pea, into a
small cup nearly full of water containing a drop or two of strong
nitric acid; the moment that the metal touches the liquid it will float
upon its surface, enveloped with a beautiful rose-colored flame, and
entirely dissolve.




Currents in Boiling Water.


Fill a large glass tube with water, and throw into it a few particles
of bruised amber or shreds of litmus; then hold the tube by a handle
for the purpose, upright in the flame of a lamp, and as the water
becomes warm it will be seen that currents, carrying with them the
pieces of amber will begin to ascend in the center, and to descend
towards the circumference of the tube. These currents will soon become
rapid in their motions, and continue till the water boils.




Hot Water Lighter than Cold.


Pour into a glass tube, about ten inches long and one inch in diameter,
a little water colored with pink or other dye; then fill it up
gradually and carefully with colorless water, so as not to mix them;
apply heat at the bottom of the tube, and the colored water will ascend
and be diffused throughout the whole.




Expansion of Water by Cold.


All fluids except water diminish in bulk till they freeze. Thus, fill
a large thermometer tube with water, say of the temperature of eighty
degrees, and then plunge the bulb into pounded ice and salt, or any
other freezing mixture; the water will go on shrinking in the tube
till it has attained the temperature of about forty degrees, and
then, instead of continuing to contract till it freezes, it will be
seen slowly to expand, and consequently to rise in the tube until it
congeals.

In this case the expansion below forty degrees and above forty degrees
seem to be equal, so that the water will be of the same bulk at
thirty-two degrees as at forty-eight degrees, that is, at eight degrees
above or below forty degrees.




The Cup of Tantalus.


This pretty toy may be purchased at any optician’s for seventy-five
cents. It consists of a cup in which is placed a human standing figure
concealing a syphon or bent tube, with one end longer than the other.
This rises in one leg of the figure to reach the chin, and descends
through the other leg, through the bottom of the cup to a reservoir
beneath. If you pour water in the cup it will rise in the shorter leg
by its upward pressure, driving out the air before it through the
longer leg; and when the cup is filled above the bend of the syphon,
that is, level with the chin of the figure, the pressure of the water
will force it over into the longer leg of the syphon, and the cup
will be emptied, the toy thus imitating Tantalus, of mythology, who
is represented by the poets as punished in Erebus with an insatiable
thirst, and placed up to the chin in a pool of water, which, however,
flowed away as soon as he attempted to taste it.




The Magic Whirlpool.


Fill a glass tumbler with water, throw upon its surface a few fragments
or thin shavings of camphor, and they will instantly begin to move, and
acquire a motion both progressive and rotary, which will continue for
a considerable time. During these rotations if the water be touched
by any substance which is at all greasy, the floating particles will
quickly dart back, and, as if by a stroke of magic, be instantly
deprived of their motion and vivacity.

In like manner, if thin slices of cork be steeped in sulphuric ether in
a closed bottle for two or three days, and then placed upon the water,
they will rotate for several minutes, like the camphor, until the
slices of cork, having discharged all their ether, and become soaked
with water, they will keep at rest.

If the water be made hot the motion of the camphor will be more
rapid than in cold water, but it will cease in proportionately less
time. Thus, provide two glasses, one containing water at fifty-eight
degrees, and the other at two hundred and ten degrees; place raspings
of camphor upon each at the same time; the camphor in the first glass
will rotate for about five hours, until all but a very minute portion
has evaporated, while the rotation of the camphor in the hot water
will last only nineteen minutes. About half the camphor will pass off
and the remaining pieces, instead of being dull, white and opaque,
will be vitreous and transparent, and evidently soaked with water.
The gyrations, too, which at first will be very rapid, will gradually
decline in velocity until they become quite sluggish.

The stilling influence of oil upon waves has become proverbial. The
extraordinary manner in which a small quantity of oil instantly spreads
over a very large surface of troubled water, and the stealthy manner in
which even a rough wind glides over it must have excited the admiration
of all who have witnessed it.

By the same principle a drop of oil may be made to stop the motion of
the camphor, as follows: Throw some camphor, both in slices and in
small particles, upon the surface of water, and while they are rotating
dip a glass rod into oil of turpentine. Then allow a single drop
thereof to trickle down the inner side of the glass to the surface of
the water. The camphor will instantly dart to the opposite point of the
liquid surface, and cease to rotate.

If a few drops of sulphuric or muriatic acid be let fall into the
water, they will gradually stop the motion of the camphor, but if
camphor be dropped into nitric acid, diluted with its own bulk of
water, it will rotate rapidly for a few seconds and then stop.

If a piece of the rotating camphor be attentively examined with a lens,
the currents of the water can be well distinguished, jetting out,
chiefly from the corners of the camphor, and bearing it round with
irregular force.

The currents, as given out by the camphor, may also be seen by means of
the microscope; a drop or two of pure water being placed upon a slip
of glass, with a particle of camphor floating upon it. By this means
the current may be detected, and it will be seen that they cause the
rotations.

A flat watch-glass may be employed, raised a few inches and supported
on a wire ring, kept steady by thrusting one end into an upright piece
of wood like a retort stand. Then put the camphor and water in the
watch-glass, and place under the frame a sheet of white paper, so that
it may receive the shadow of the glass, camphor, etc., to be cast by a
steady light, placed above, and somewhat on one side of the watch-glass.

On observing the shadow, which may be considered a magnified
representation of the object itself, the rotations and currents can be
distinguished.




Fire Under Water.


Put thirty grains of phosphorus into a bottle which contains three
or four ounces of water. Place the vessel over a lamp and give it a
boiling heat. Balls of fire will soon be seen to issue from the water
after the manner of an artificial firework, attended with the most
beautiful coruscations.




To Light Steel.


Make a piece of steel red in the fire, then hold it with a pair of
pincers or tongs; take in the other hand a stick of brimstone and touch
the piece of steel with it. Immediately after their contact you will
see the steel melt and drop like a liquid.




A Test of Love.


Put into a phial some sulphuric ether, color it red with alkanet, then
saturate the tincture with spermaceti. This preparation is solid ten
degrees above freezing point, and melts and boils at twenty degrees.
Place the phial which contains it in a lady’s hand and tell her that if
in love, the solid mass will dissolve. In a few minutes the substance
will become fluid.




An Egg Pushed Into a Wine Bottle.


To accomplish this seemingly incredible act requires the following
preparation: You must take an egg and soak it in strong vinegar, and
in process of time its shell will become quite soft so that it may
be extended lengthways without breaking; then insert it into the
neck of a small bottle, and by pouring cold water upon it, it will
reassume its former figure and hardness. This is really a complete
curiosity, and baffles those who are not in the secret to find out
how it is accomplished. If the vinegar used to saturate the egg is
not sufficiently strong to produce the required softness of shell,
add one teaspoonful of strong acetic acid to every two tablespoonfuls
of vinegar. This will render the egg perfectly flexible, and of easy
insertion into the bottle, which must then be filled with cold water.




A Chemical Fountain.


Take two small glass jars and close them with corks. In each of these
pierce two holes and introduce a glass tube curved in the form of a
lengthened V. The two extremities of this tube must not reach further
than just a little below the inner surface of the corks. In one jar
pour water until it is three-quarters full, and pass through the second
hole of the cork a straight glass tube, open at both ends and reaching
nearly the bottom. This jar must be hermetically corked. (If necessary,
seal the top.) In the other jar put some chalk, and in the second hole
of the cork, left free, pass the extremity of a paper funnel in which
you place a pellet of wax or putty.

Your apparatus thus being ready, through the funnel pour some vinegar,
or better still, some sulphuric acid. The latter ingredient coming in
contact with the chalk, forms carbonic acid, which, not being able to
escape through the funnel closed by the pellet, passes through the
curved tube into the other jar and is dissolved in the water.

[Illustration]

After some time a strong pressure will be exercised on the liquid, and
the water rising rapidly up through the vertical tube, will spout out
as from a fountain.

This experiment may be varied and reduced to a simpler one. Take one
jar, fill it up two-thirds with water, and fit it with a cork with two
holes, through which pass two tubes; the one going to the bottom, the
other resting just over the surface of the liquid. The latter should be
fitted with a receiver.

Seal the cork so as to render it air-tight. In the top receiver pour
water, which will go down into the jar and raise the level of the water
already contained in it.

The air, being compressed, will act upon the liquid mass in the lower
jar, and the water will escape through the free tube in a jet with more
or less force according to the pressure exercised.




Weighing Gases.


Do not be cast down because you see another term to be explained. A
gas is, you may have already guessed, simply a fluid. Matter exists in
three states, solid, liquid and gaseous. Everything can exist in these
three states under different conditions of heat and pressure.

For instance, ice, water, and steam are precisely the same thing, a
mixture of oxygen and hydrogen, though in different states. Hence steam
is simply the gaseous form of ice or water. Now some gases are heavier
than air, and among them is carbonic acid, a gas given off from the
lungs in breathing.

By means of a very simply-constructed balance, you can prove this gas
to be heavier than air. Sounds queer, doesn’t it? to talk of weighing
something that you cannot handle or see.

It is not difficult to do. Bend some wire, minding that the beams of
the balance are curved as in the figure.

For one side of the scales a strong cardboard box will answer
admirably; for the other the lid of a round box will serve. Hang the
whole on a string and adjust it by putting some grains of sand in the
round scale on which the weights are placed, to make each side balance
one another and the scales are ready for use.

[Illustration]

The production of carbonic acid is easy. Pour a little sulphuric acid
and water over some chalk. Collect the gas given off in a bottle or
jar. In doing so you need not be afraid that it will escape, since it
is heavier than the air.

In pouring it in the box of the scale, you will see the box sink down,
which is clearly an indication that the gas, which has just been poured
into the scale is heavier than the air, whose place it has taken. This
experiment may be tried in other curious ways.




In Water but not Wet.


With some lycopodium, powder the surface of a large or small vessel of
water; you may then challenge any one to drop a piece of money into
the water, and that you will get it with the hand without wetting your
skin. The lycopodium adheres to the hand, and prevents its contact
with the water. A little shake of the hand after the feat is over will
dislodge the powder.




Image of a Volcano.


This is another experiment on the density of liquids. In a small jar
put some wine or colored alcohol, and close it with a cork, through
which you have passed a small tube, a quill or a hollow straw. In
lowering this jar gently in a pail full of water, you will soon see the
liquid escape and rise to the surface of the water, describing spirals
which resemble smoke, and give a pretty good image, considerably
diminished, of a volcano.




Reciprocal Images.


Make two holes in the wainscot of a room, each a foot high and ten
inches wide, and about a foot distant from each other. Let these
apertures be about the height of a man’s head, and in each of them
place a transparent glass in a frame like a common mirror.

Behind the partition, and directly facing each aperture, place two
mirrors inclosed in the wainscot, in an angle of forty-five degrees.
These mirrors are each to be eighteen inches square, and all the space
between must be inclosed with pasteboard painted black, and well closed
that no light can enter; let there be also two curtains to cover them,
which you may draw aside at pleasure.

When a person looks into one of these fictitious mirrors, instead
of seeing his own face, he will see the object that is in front of
the other; thus, if two persons stand at the same time before these
mirrors, instead of each seeing himself, they will reciprocally see
each other.

There should be a sconce with a lighted candle placed on each side of
the two glasses in the wainscot, to enlighten the faces of the persons
who look in them, or the experiment will not have so remarkable an
effect.




Imitation of Animal Tints.


To accomplish this metamorphosis, it is necessary to have earthen
vases which have little edges or rims near their mouths, and should
be of a size sufficiently large to hold suspended the bird or flower
which you intend placing in them. You should likewise be provided
with stoppers of cork, of a diameter equal to that of their mouths.
To make an experiment upon some bird, it is necessary to commence by
making a hole in the stopper, sufficiently large to contain the neck
of the bird without strangling it. This done, you divide the diameter
of the stopper into two equal parts so as to facilitate the placing
of it around the neck without doing injury to the bird. The two parts
being brought together, you place at the bottom of the vase an ounce
of quicklime, and beneath that a quarter of an ounce of sal ammoniac.
When you perceive the effervescence commence to take place, you
promptly insert the stopper, to which the bird is attached, leaving the
neck outside. The plumage of the body, exposed to this effervescent
vapor, will become impregnated with the various colors produced by this
chemical combination.




Melting a Coin.


Fix three pins in the table and lay the piece of money upon them; then
place a heap of the flour of sulphur below the piece of money, and
another above it, and set fire to them. When the flame is extinct, you
will find on the upper part of the piece a thin plate of metal, which
has been detached from it.




Explosive Gas.


Mix two drachms of the filings of iron with one ounce of concentrated
spirit of vitriol in a strong bottle that holds about a quarter of a
pint; stop it close, and in a few moments shake the bottle; then taking
out the cork, put a lighted candle near its mouth which should be a
little inclined, and you will soon observe an inflammation arise from
the bottle, attended with a loud explosion.

To guard against the danger of the bottle bursting, the best way would
be to bury it in the ground and apply the light to the mouth by means
of a taper fastened to the end of a long stick.




Cold from Evaporation.


Ether poured upon a glass tube in a thin stream will evaporate and cool
it to such a degree that water contained in it may be frozen.




Self-Dancing Egg.


Fill a quill with quicksilver; seal it at both ends with good hard wax;
then have an egg boiled; take a small piece of the shell off the small
end and thrust in the quill with the quicksilver; lay it on the ground
and it will not cease tumbling about as long as any heat remains in it;
or if you put quicksilver into a small bladder and blow it up, then
warm the bladder, it will skip about as long as heat remains in it.




Flash of Fire in a Room.


Dissolve camphor in spirits of wine and deposit the vessel containing
the solution in a very close room, where the spirits of wine must
be made to evaporate by strong and speedy boiling. If any one then
enters the room with a lighted candle the air will inflame, while the
combustion will be so sudden and of so short a duration as to occasion
no danger.




Cast Iron Drops.


Bring a bar of iron to a white heat and then apply to it a roll of
sulphur. The iron will immediately melt and run into drops.

The experiment should be performed over a basin of water, in which
the drops that fall down will be quenched. These drops will be found
reduced into a sort of cast iron.




Explosion without Heat.


Take a crystal or two of the nitrate of copper and bruise them; then
moisten them with water and roll them up quickly in a piece of tinfoil,
and in half a minute or little more, the tinfoil will begin to smoke
and soon after take fire and explode with a slight noise. Unless the
crystals of the nitrate of copper are moistened, no heat will be
produced.




Fiery Powder.


Put three ounces of rock alum and one ounce of honey or sugar into a
new earthen dish, glazed, and which is capable of standing a strong
heat; keep the mixture over the fire, stirring it continually until it
becomes very dry and hard; then remove it from the fire and pound it
to a coarse powder. Put this powder into a long-necked bottle, leaving
a part of the vessel empty; and having placed it in the crucible, fill
up the crucible with fine sand and surround it with burning coals.
When the bottle has been kept at a red heat for about seven or eight
minutes, and no more vapor issues from it, remove it from the fire,
then stop it with a piece of cork; and, having suffered it to cool,
preserve the mixture in small bottles, well closed.

If you unclose one of these bottles and let fall a few grains of this
powder on a bit of paper, or any other very dry substance it will first
become blue, then brown, and will at last burn the paper or other
substance on which it has fallen.




Illumination.


A very pleasing exhibition may be made, with very little trouble or
expense, in the following manner: Provide a box, which you can fit up
with architectural designs cut on pasteboard; prick small holes into
those parts of the building where you wish the illuminations to appear,
observing that, in proportion to the perspective, the holes are to be
made smaller, and on the near objects the holes are to be made larger.
Behind these designs thus perforated you fix a lamp or candle, but in
such a manner that the reflection of the light shall only shine through
the hole: then placing a light of just sufficient brilliancy to show
the design of the buildings before it, and making a hole for the sight
at the front end of the box, you will have a tolerable representation
of illuminated buildings.

The best way of throwing the light in front is to place an oiled
paper before it, which will cast a mellow gleam over the scenery, and
not diminish the effect of the illumination. This can be very easily
planned, both not to obstruct the sight, nor be seen to disadvantage.
The lights behind the picture should be very strong, and if a
magnifying glass were placed in the sight hole it would tend greatly to
increase the effect. The box must be covered in, leaving an aperture
for the smoke of the lights to pass through.

The above exhibition can only be shown at candle light; but there is
another way, by fixing small pieces of gold on the building, instead
of drilling the holes, which gives something like the appearance of
illumination, but by no means equal to the foregoing experiment.

N. B.--It would be an improvement if paper of various colors, rendered
transparent by oil, were placed between the lights behind the aperture
in the buildings, as they would then resemble lamps of different
colors.




Sun and Spirit.


Put a small quantity of spirits of wine into a glass, and put a cent or
coin in with it; then direct the rays of the sun by means of a burning
glass upon the coin, and in a short time it will become so hot as to
inflame the spirits.




Stars in Water.


Put half a drachm of solid phosphorus into a large pint flask--holding
it slanting that the phosphorus may not break the glass. Pour upon
it a gill and a half of water and place the whole over a tea-kettle
lamp, or any common tin lamp filled with spirits of wine. Light the
wick which should be almost half an inch from the flask; and as soon
as the water is heated, streams of fire will issue from the water by
starts, resembling sky-rockets; some particles will adhere to the
sides of the glass, representing stars, and will frequently display
brilliant rays. These appearances will continue at times till the water
begins to simmer, when immediately a curious aurora borealis begins,
and gradually ascends till it collects to a pointed flame; when it has
continued half a minute, blow out the flame of the lamp and the point
that was formed will rush down, forming beautiful illuminated clouds
of fire, rolling over each other for some time, which, disappearing, a
splendid hemisphere of stars presents itself; after waiting a minute
or two, light the lamp again, and nearly the same phenomenon will be
displayed as from the beginning. Let the repetition of lighting and
blowing out the lamp be made for three or four times at least, that
the stars may be increased. After the third or fourth time of blowing
out the lamp, in a few minutes after the internal surface of the flask
is dry, many of the stars will shoot with great splendor from side
to side, and some of them will fire off with brilliant rays; these
appearances will continue several minutes. What remains in the flask
will serve for the same experiment several times, and without adding
any more water. Care should be taken after the operation is over, to
lay the flask and water in a cool, secure place.




Parlor Ballooning.


It is an interesting and amusing experiment to inflate a balloon made
of gold-beater’s skin (using a little gum arabic to close any holes or
fissures), filling it from a bladder or jar, and tying a thread around
the mouth of it, to prevent the escape of the gas. When fully blown,
attach a fanciful car of colored paper, or very thin pasteboard, to it,
and let it float in a large room; it will soon gain the ceiling, where
it will remain for any length of time; if it be let off in the open
air it will soon ascend out of sight. This experiment may be varied by
putting small grains of shot into the car, in order to ascertain the
difference between the weight of hydrogen gas and atmospheric air.




Marvelous.


Wrap up a very smooth ball of lead in a piece of paper, taking care
that there be no wrinkles in it, and that it be everywhere in contact
with the ball; if it be held in this state over the flame of a taper,
the lead will be melted without the paper being burnt. The lead,
indeed, when once fused will not fail in a short time to pierce the
paper, and run through.




Mutability.


Infuse a few shavings of logwood in common water, and when the liquid
is sufficiently red pour it into a bottle. Then take three drinking
glasses and rinse one of them with strong vinegar; throw into the
second a small quantity of pounded alum, which will not be observed if
the glass has been washed, and leave the third without any preparation.
If the red liquor in the bottle be poured into the first glass, it will
appear of a straw color; if the second it will pass gradually from a
bluish gray to black, when stirred with a key or any piece of iron
which has been previously dipped in strong vinegar. In the third glass
the red liquor will assume a violet tint.

[Illustration: THE END.]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR TEN CENT HAND BOOKS.

USEFUL, INSTRUCTIVE AND AMUSING.

Containing valuable information on almost every subject, such as
=Writing=, =Speaking=, =Dancing=, =Cooking=; also =Rules of Etiquette=,
=The Art of Ventriloquism=, =Gymnastic Exercises=, and =The Science of
Self-Defense=, =etc.=, =etc.=

   1 Napoleon’s Oraculum and Dream Book.
   2 How to Do Tricks.
   3 How to Flirt.
   4 How to Dance.
   5 How to Make Love.
   6 How to Become an Athlete.
   7 How to Keep Birds.
   8 How to Become a Scientist.
   9 How to Become a Ventriloquist.
  10 How to Box.
  11 How to Write Love Letters.
  12 How to Write Letters to Ladies.
  13 How to Do It; or, Book of Etiquette.
  14 How to Make Candy.
  15 How to Become Rich.
  16 How to Keep a Window Garden.
  17 How to Dress.
  18 How to Become Beautiful.
  19 Frank Tousey’s U. S. Distance Tables, Pocket Companion and Guide.
  20 How to Entertain an Evening Party.
  21 How to Hunt and Fish.
  22 How to Do Second Sight.
  23 How to Explain Dreams.
  24 How to Write Letters to Gentlemen.
  25 How to Become a Gymnast.
  26 How to Row, Sail and Build a Boat.
  27 How to Recite and Book of Recitations.
  28 How to Tell Fortunes.
  29 How to Become an Inventor.
  30 How to Cook.
  31 How to Become a Speaker.
  32 How to Ride a Bicycle.
  33 How to Behave.
  34 How to Fence.
  35 How to Play Games.
  36 How to Solve Conundrums.
  37 How to Keep House.
  38 How to Become Your Own Doctor.
  39 How to Raise Dogs, Poultry, Pigeons and Rabbits.
  40 How to Make and Set Traps.
  41 The Boys of New York End Men’s Joke Book.
  42 The Boys of New York Stump Speaker.
  43 How to Become a Magician.
  44 How to Write in an Album.
  45 The Boys of New York Minstrel Guide and Joke Book.
  46 How to Make and Use Electricity.
  47 How to Break, Ride and Drive a Horse.
  48 How to Build and Sail Canoes.
  49 How to Debate.
  50 How to Stuff Birds and Animals.
  51 How to Do Tricks with Cards.
  52 How to Play Cards.
  53 How to Write Letters.
  54 How to Keep and Manage Pets.
  55 How to Collect Stamps and Coins.
  56 How to Become an Engineer.
  57 How to Make Musical Instruments.
  58 How to Become a Detective.
  59 How to Make a Magic Lantern.
  60 How to Become a Photographer.
  61 How to Become a Bowler.
  62 How to Become a West Point Military Cadet.
  63 How to Become a Naval Cadet.
  64 How to Make Electrical Machines.
  65 Muldoon’s Jokes.
  66 How to Do Puzzles.
  67 How to Do Electrical Tricks.
  68 How to Do Chemical Tricks.
  69 How to Do Sleight of Hand.
  70 How to Make Magic Toys.
  71 How to Do Mechanical Tricks.
  72 How to Do Sixty Tricks with Cards.
  73 How to Do Tricks with Numbers.
  74 How to Write Letters Correctly.
  75 How to Become a Conjuror.
  76 How to Tell Fortunes by the Hand.
  77 How to Do Forty Tricks with Cards.
  78 How to Do the Black Art.
  79 How to Become an Actor.
  80 Gus Williams’ Joke Book.

All the above books are for sale by newsdealers throughout the United
States and Canada, or they will be sent, post-paid, to your address, on
receipt of 10c. each.

_Send Your Name and Address for Our Latest Illustrated Catalogue._

FRANK TOUSEY, Publisher,

24 UNION SQUARE, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Illustrations have been moved to paragraph breaks near where they are
mentioned.

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation were retained as they appear in
the original publication, except that obvious typos have been corrected.

Additional notes:

p. 3: Inserted “that” (paper, that give)

p. 6: “choose” changed to “chose” (and chose to)

p. 11: “jar, or a soup-plate” should be “jar, and a soup-plate”

p. 18: “altered as in fig. 4” should be “altered as in fig. 6”

p. 18: “lightness” changed to “tightness” (absolute tightness. Such)

p. 22: “entirely. As” changed to “entirely, as” (out entirely, as)

p. 28: “valve shown in fig. 4” should be “valve shown in fig. 6”

p. 45: “with” inserted (ground, with a)





End of Project Gutenberg's How to Do Chemical Tricks, by A. Anderson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO DO CHEMICAL TRICKS ***

***** This file should be named 50100-0.txt or 50100-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/1/0/50100/

Produced by Craig Kirkwood, Demian Katz and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (Images
courtesy of the Digital Library@Villanova University
(http://digital.library.villanova.edu/).)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

